---
author: 
title: Research Projects
---


###  _Fiscal Equalization Pushes Up Local Tax Rates: Evidence from Switzerland_ 

[current manuscript](/./images/equalization_2023_02.pdf) (02/2023)

**Status:** Revise and Resubmit, _Regional Science and Urban Economics_


This paper investigates incentive effects of fiscal equalization on local tax rates. I propose two refinements to current empirical estimations of these incentive effects. I show that local policy makers may conceive of changes in equalization transfers as stemming from discrete rather than marginal changes in the tax base, thus considering “supramarginal” equalization rates. Second, I study “effective” equalization rates, conditioned on the current tax rate. To identify
the incentives created by equalization grants I investigate the reform of an inter-municipal equalization scheme in Switzerland. My baseline estimate from supramarginal equalization rates is 2-3 times larger than that found in previous comparable studies. I however do not find any effect for effective equalization rates.

### _Progressive Taxation, Commuting Costs and Residential Locations Decisions in Fiscally Decentralized Cities_

with Jeremy Zuchuat

[current manuscript](https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4357959) (02/2023)

**Status:** Submitted.

Decentralized taxation and commuting affect numerous dimensions of economic activity, but how they jointly shape residential decisions and spatial income sorting is still not well understood. We develop a structural model of individual location choices in a fiscally decentralized monocentric city with explicit commuting costs. Spatial income sorting arises from decentralized progressive income taxes and non-homothetic housing preferences. Progressive taxation impacts high-income individuals’ utility more markedly, hence reducing their commuting disutility. This induces high incomes to be more willing to commute to low-tax jurisdictions. We estimate our model using micro-level data on moving decisions in Switzerland. Based on a random utility framework, we find that richer individuals are more sensitive to taxes and less sensitive to commuting. Further, our results show that lower local taxes directly increase individuals’ willingness to commute. In a counterfactual exercise, we show that uniform	taxation within urban areas would lead to more high-income individuals locating in central jurisdictions, hence enduring shorter commutes.

###  _How Fiscally Autonomous Are Local Governments? An Empirical Test_

Available on request.

**Status:** Submitted.

How freely can local jurisdictions change their taxes and spending? I propose an empirical test of the effective degree of municipal fiscal autonomy. Based on a tax competition model where jurisdictions are are partially expenditure constrained, I derive a testable prediction: tax cuts triggered by a small positive exogenous revenue shock will be stronger with higher perceived tax-base mobility the less fiscally constrained is the local decision maker. I apply this test using a revenue shock generated by a reform in an inter-municipal equalization scheme within a Swiss canton. Tax-base mobility is proxied by the availability of zoned land reserves. I find that higher residential land availability is associated with stronger tax rate responses, but I find no statistically significant results for industrial land reserves. In light of the theory, this suggests that the effective degree of fiscal autonomy of local jurisdictions is low. Usual indicators of fiscal decentralization based on public accounts might overestimate the actual autonomy of local governments.